# Benchmarking of methods to analyze data derived from GBS-MeDIP

This repository contains scripts used for benchmarking various statistical and bioinformatic methods specifically designed for analyzing data obtained through Genotyping-by-Sequencing combined with Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (GBS-MeDIP).

## Overview

GBS-MeDIP is a cost-effective method developed to investigate DNA methylation. Due to its unique data characteristics, traditional methods for RNA-seq or MeDIP-seq analyses are not suitable. This repository provides scripts used to create a count matrix and to perform differential methylated analysis specifically for GBS-MeDIP data.

## Content Description

#### 1. Count Matrix Generation

-  `` Script for merging genomic coordinates and generating SAF files used in subsequent counting steps.

-  `feature_counts.sh` Shell script utilizing featureCounts software to generate accurate count matrices from BAM files.

-  `compare_counts.R` R script to visualize and compare count matrices generated by MEDIPS and featureCounts.

#### 2. Distribution Analysis

-  `distribution_fitting.R` R script to evaluate the statistical distribution (normal, poisson, negative-binomial) fitting the GBS-MeDIP count data. Calculates and visualizes Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) values.

#### 3. Statistical Method Benchmarking

-  `pvalue_uniformity_test.R` Evaluates the uniformity of p-value distributions to detect biases in various statistical methods.

-  `false_positive_rate.R` Computes the False Positive Rate (FPR) for statistical methods such as Mann-Whitney, EdgeR (maximum and quasi-likelihood), and Limma.

-  `simulation_true_positive_rate.R` Simulates data to compute True Positive Rates (TPR) and generates Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves to compare the accuracy of different methods.

## Recommended Pipeline

Based on our benchmarking results, we recommend the following pipeline for GBS-MeDIP data:

-  Count Matrix Generation: featureCounts

-  Differential Methylation Analysis: Mann-Whitney test

## Dependencies

R packages: ggplot2 v.3.5.1, fitdistrplus v.1.1-11, EdgeR v4.6.1, Limma v3.64.0, MEDIPS v1.52.0

Tools: featureCounts v2.0.3, samtools v.1.14

## Usage

Clone the repository and follow the script-specific instructions provided as comments within each script.
```
git clone https://github.com/Violeta-de-Anca/Benchmarking-of-methods-to-analyse-data-derived-from-GBS-MeDIP.git
```
## References

Detailed methodology, results, and discussion are presented in our published paper:

Violeta de Anca Prado, et al. "Benchmarking of methods to analyze data derived from GBS-MeDIP." (Details and DOI/link to be added upon publication).

## Authors

-  [Violeta de Anca Prado](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1845-509X)

-  [Fábio Pértille](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7214-9184)

-  [Pedro Sá](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1588-6778)

-  [Marta Gòdia](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0439-4014)

-  [Joëlle Rüegg](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6580-9201)

-  [Carlos Guerrero Bosagna (Corresponding author)](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1935-5875)

## Funding

This project was funded by the European Union (Grant Agreement No 101000236) and John Templeton Foundation (Grant ID 62167).

## Acknowledgements

We acknowledge support from the National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS), the John Templeton Foundation, the European Union, Svenska Forskningsrådet, and the help from all the attendants from the workshop on GBS-MeDIP data analysis in relation to the GEroNIMO project, especially Sonia Eynard and Gwendal Restoux.
